The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Turmoil, by Booth Tarkington

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Turmoil
       A Novel

Author: Booth Tarkington

Posting Date: August 6, 2008 [EBook #1098]
Release Date: December, 1997
Last Updated: September 16, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TURMOIL ***




Produced by Lois Heiser





THE TURMOIL

A NOVEL

By Booth Tarkington

1915.


To Laurel.



CHAPTER I

There is a midland city in the heart of fair, open country, a dirty and
wonderful city nesting dingily in the fog of its own smoke. The stranger
must feel the dirt before he feels the wonder, for the dirt will be upon
him instantly. It will be upon him and within him, since he must breathe
it, and he may care for no further proof that wealth is here better
loved than cleanliness; but whether he cares or not, the negligently
tended streets incessantly press home the point, and so do the flecked
and grimy citizens. At a breeze he must smother in the whirlpools of
dust, and if he should decline at any time to inhale the smoke he has
the meager alternative of suicide.

The smoke is like the bad breath of a giant panting for more and more
riches. He gets them and pants the fiercer, smelling and swelling
prodigiously. He has a voice, a hoarse voice, hot and rapacious trained
to one tune: “Wealth! I will get Wealth! I will make Wealth! I will sell
Wealth for more Wealth! My house shall be dirty, my garment shall be
dirty, and I will foul my neighbor so that he cannot be clean--but I
will get Wealth! There shall be no clean thing about me: my wife shall
be dirty and my child shall be dirty, but I will get Wealth!” And yet it
is not wealth that he is so greedy for: what the giant really wants is
hasty riches. To get these he squanders wealth upon the four winds, for
wealth is in the smoke.

Not so long ago as a generation, there was no panting giant here, no
heaving, grimy city; there was but a pleasant big town of neighborly
people who had understanding of one another, being, on the whole, much
of the same type. It was a leisurely and kindly place--“homelike,” it
was called--and when the visitor had been taken through the State Asylum
for the Insane and made to appreciate the view of the cemetery from a
little hill, his host’s duty as Baedeker was done. The good burghers
were given to jogging comfortably about in phaetons or in surreys for
a family drive on Sunday. No one was very rich; few were very poor; the
air was clean, and there was time to live.

But there was a spirit abroad in the land, and it was strong here as
elsewhere--a spirit that had moved in the depths of the American soil
and labored there, sweating, till it stirred the surface, rove the
mountains, and emerged, tangible and monstrous, the god of all good
American hearts--Bigness. And that god wrought the panting giant.

In the souls of the burghers there had always been the profound
longing for size. Year by year the longing increased until it became
an accumulated force: We must Grow! We must be Big! We must be Bigger!
Bigness means Money! And the thing began to happen; their longing became
a mighty Will. We must be Bigger! Bigger! Bigger! Get people here! Coax
them here! Bribe them! Swindle them into coming, if you must, but get
them! Shout them into coming! Deafen them into coming! Any kind of
people; all kinds of people! We must be Bigger! Blow! Boost! Brag!
Kill the fault-finder! Scream and bellow to the Most High: Bigness is
patriotism and honor! Bigness is love and life and happiness! Bigness is
Money! We want Bigness!

They got it. From all the states the people came; thinly at first, and
slowly, but faster and faster in thicker and thicker swarms as the quick
years went by. White people came, and black people and brown people
and yellow people; the negroes came from the South by the thousands and
thousands, multiplying by other thousands and thousands faster than
they could die. From the four quarters of the earth the people came,
the broken and the unbroken, the tame and the wild--Germans, Irish,
Italians, Hungarians, Scotch, Welsh, English, French, Swiss, Swedes,
Norwegians, Greeks, Poles, Russian Jews, Dalmatians, Armenians,
Rumanians, Servians, Persians, Syrians, Japanese, Chinese, Turks, and
every hybrid that these could propagate. And if there were no Eskimos
nor Patagonians, what other human strain that earth might furnish failed
to swim and bubble in this crucible?

With Bigness came the new machinery and the rush; the streets began to
roar and rattle, the houses to tremble; the pavements were worn under
the tread of hurrying multitudes. The old, leisurely, quizzical look of
the faces was lost in something harder and warier; and a cockney
type began to emerge discernibly--a cynical young mongrel barbaric
of feature, muscular and cunning; dressed in good fabrics fashioned
apparently in imitation of the sketches drawn by newspaper comedians.
The female of his kind came with him--a pale girl, shoddy and a little
rouged; and they communicated in a nasal argot, mainly insolences and
elisions. Nay, the common speech of the people showed change: in
place of the old midland vernacular, irregular but clean, and not
unwholesomely drawling, a jerky dialect of coined metaphors began to
be heard, held together by GUNNAS and GOTTAS and much fostered by the
public journals.

The city piled itself high in the center, tower on tower for a nucleus,
and spread itself out over the plain, mile after mile; and in its
vitals, like benevolent bacilli contending with malevolent in the body
of a man, missions and refuges offered what resistance they might to the
saloons and all the hells that cities house and shelter. Temptation
and ruin were ready commodities on the market for purchase by the
venturesome; highwaymen walked the streets at night and sometimes
killed; snatching thieves were busy everywhere in the dusk; while
house-breakers were a common apprehension and frequent reality. Life
itself was somewhat safer from intentional destruction than it was in
medieval Rome during a faction war--though the Roman murderer was more
like to pay for his deed--but death or mutilation beneath the wheels lay
in ambush at every crossing.

The politicians let the people make all the laws they liked; it did
not matter much, and the taxes went up, which is good for politicians.
Law-making was a pastime of the people; nothing pleased them more.
Singular fermentation of their humor, they even had laws forbidding
dangerous speed. More marvelous still, they had a law forbidding smoke!
They forbade chimneys to smoke and they forbade cigarettes to smoke.
They made laws for all things and forgot them immediately; though
sometimes they would remember after a while, and hurry to make new laws
that the old laws should be enforced--and then forget both new and old.
Wherever enforcement threatened Money or Votes--or wherever it was too
much to bother--it became a joke. Influence was the law.

So the place grew. And it grew strong.

Straightway when he came, each man fell to the same worship:

  Give me of thyself, O Bigness:
  Power to get more power!
  Riches to get more riches!
  Give me of thy sweat that I may sweat more!
  Give me Bigness to get more Bigness to myself,
  O Bigness, for Thine is the Power and the Glory! And
       there is no end but Bigness, ever and for ever!



CHAPTER II

The Sheridan Building was the biggest skyscraper; the Sheridan Trust
Company was the biggest of its kind, and Sheridan himself had been the
biggest builder and breaker and truster and buster under the smoke. He
had come from a country cross-roads, at the beginning of the growth, and
he had gone up and down in the booms and relapses of that period; but
each time he went down he rebounded a little higher, until finally,
after a year of overwork and anxiety--the latter not decreased by a
chance, remote but possible, of recuperation from the former in the
penitentiary--he found himself on top, with solid substance under
his feet; and thereafter “played it safe.” But his hunger to get was
unabated, for it was in the very bones of him and grew fiercer.

He was the city incarnate. He loved it, calling it God’s country, as he
called the smoke Prosperity, breathing the dingy cloud with relish. And
when soot fell upon his cuff he chuckled; he could have kissed it. “It’s
good! It’s good!” he said, and smacked his lips in gusto. “Good, clean
soot; it’s our life-blood, God bless it!” The smoke was one of his
great enthusiasms; he laughed at a committee of plaintive housewives who
called to beg his aid against it. “Smoke’s what brings your husbands’
money home on Saturday night,” he told them, jovially. “Smoke may hurt
your little shrubberies in the front yard some, but it’s the catarrhal
climate and the adenoids that starts your chuldern coughing. Smoke makes
the climate better. Smoke means good health: it makes the people wash
more. They have to wash so much they wash off the microbes. You go
home and ask your husbands what smoke puts in their pockets out o’ the
pay-roll--and you’ll come around next time to get me to turn out more
smoke instead o’ chokin’ it off!”

It was Narcissism in him to love the city so well; he saw his reflection
in it; and, like it, he was grimy, big, careless, rich, strong, and
unquenchably optimistic. From the deepest of his inside all the way out
he believed it was the finest city in the world. “Finest” was his word.
He thought of it as his city as he thought of his family as his family;
and just as profoundly believed his city to be the finest city in
the world, so did he believe his family to be--in spite of his son
Bibbs--the finest family in the world. As a matter of fact, he knew
nothing worth knowing about either.

Bibbs Sheridan was a musing sort of boy, poor in health, and considered
the failure--the “odd one”--of the family. Born during that most
dangerous and anxious of the early years, when the mother fretted and
the father took his chance, he was an ill-nourished baby, and
grew meagerly, only lengthwise, through a feeble childhood. At his
christening he was committed for life to “Bibbs” mainly through lack of
imagination on his mother’s part, for though it was her maiden name, she
had no strong affection for it; but it was “her turn” to name the baby,
and, as she explained later, she “couldn’t think of anything else she
liked AT ALL!” She offered this explanation one day when the sickly boy
was nine and after a long fit of brooding had demanded some reason for
his name’s being Bibbs. He requested then with unwonted vehemence to
be allowed to exchange names with his older brother, Roscoe Conkling
Sheridan, or with the oldest, James Sheridan, Junior, and upon being
refused went down into the cellar and remained there the rest of
that day. And the cook, descending toward dusk, reported that he had
vanished; but a search revealed that he was in the coal-pile, completely
covered and still burrowing. Removed by force and carried upstairs,
he maintained a cryptic demeanor, refusing to utter a syllable of
explanation, even under the lash. This obvious thing was wholly a
mystery to both parents; the mother was nonplussed, failed to trace and
connect; and the father regarded his son as a stubborn and mysterious
fool, an impression not effaced as the years went by.

At twenty-two, Bibbs was physically no more than the outer scaffolding
of a man, waiting for the building to begin inside--a long-shanked,
long-faced, rickety youth, sallow and hollow and haggard, dark-haired
and dark-eyed, with a peculiar expression of countenance; indeed, at
first sight of Bibbs Sheridan a stranger might well be solicitous, for
he seemed upon the point of tears. But to a slightly longer gaze, not
grief, but mirth, was revealed as his emotion; while a more searching
scrutiny was proportionately more puzzling--he seemed about to burst out
crying or to burst out laughing, one or the other, inevitably, but it
was impossible to decide which. And Bibbs never, on any occasion of his
life, either laughed aloud or wept.

He was a “disappointment” to his father. At least that was the parent’s
word--a confirmed and established word after his first attempt to make
a “business man” of the boy. He sent Bibbs to “begin at the bottom and
learn from the ground up” in the machine-shop of the Sheridan Automatic
Pump Works, and at the end of six months the family physician sent Bibbs
to begin at the bottom and learn from the ground up in a sanitarium.

“You needn’t worry, mamma,” Sheridan told his wife. “There’s nothin’ the
matter with Bibbs except he hates work so much it makes him sick. I put
him in the machine-shop, and I guess I know what I’m doin’ about as well
as the next man. Ole Doc Gurney always was one o’ them nutty alarmists.
Does he think I’d do anything ‘d be bad for my own flesh and blood? He
makes me tired!”

Anything except perfectly definite health or perfectly definite disease
was incomprehensible to Sheridan. He had a genuine conviction that lack
of physical persistence in any task involving money must be due to some
subtle weakness of character itself, to some profound shiftlessness or
slyness. He understood typhoid fever, pneumonia, and appendicitis--one
had them, and either died or got over them and went back to work--but
when the word “nervous” appeared in a diagnosis he became honestly
suspicious: he had the feeling that there was something contemptible
about it, that there was a nigger in the wood-pile somewhere.

“Look at me,” he said. “Look at what I did at his age! Why, when I was
twenty years old, wasn’t I up every morning at four o’clock choppin’
wood--yes! and out in the dark and the snow--to build a fire in a
country grocery store? And here Bibbs has to go and have a DOCTOR
because he can’t--Pho! it makes me tired! If he’d gone at it like a man
he wouldn’t be sick.”

He paced the bedroom--the usual setting for such parental
discussions--in his nightgown, shaking his big, grizzled head and
gesticulating to his bedded spouse. “My Lord!” he said. “If a little,
teeny bit o’ work like this is too much for him, why, he ain’t fit for
anything! It’s nine-tenths imagination, and the rest of it--well, I
won’t say it’s deliberate, but I WOULD like to know just how much of
it’s put on!”

“Bibbs didn’t want the doctor,” said Mrs. Sheridan. “It was when he was
here to dinner that night, and noticed how he couldn’t eat anything.
Honey, you better come to bed.”

“Eat!” he snorted. “Eat! It’s work that makes men eat! And it’s
imagination that keeps people from eatin’. Busy men don’t get time for
that kind of imagination; and there’s another thing you’ll notice
about good health, if you’ll take the trouble to look around you Mrs.
Sheridan: busy men haven’t got time to be sick and they don’t GET sick.
You just think it over and you’ll find that ninety-nine per cent. of the
sick people you know are either women or loafers. Yes, ma’am!”

“Honey,” she said again, drowsily, “you better come to bed.”

“Look at the other boys,” her husband bade her. “Look at Jim and Roscoe.
Look at how THEY work! There isn’t a shiftless bone in their bodies.
Work never made Jim or Roscoe sick. Jim takes half the load off my
shoulders already. Right now there isn’t a harder-workin’, brighter
business man in this city than Jim. I’ve pushed him, but he give me
something to push AGAINST. You can’t push ‘nervous dyspepsia’! And look
at Roscoe; just LOOK at what that boy’s done for himself, and barely
twenty-seven years old--married, got a fine wife, and ready to build
for himself with his own money, when I put up the New House for you and
Edie.”

“Papa, you’ll catch cold in your bare feet,” she murmured. “You better
come to bed.”

“And I’m just as proud of Edie, for a girl,” he continued, emphatically,
“as I am of Jim and Roscoe for boys. She’ll make some man a mighty good
wife when the time comes. She’s the prettiest and talentedest girl in
the United States! Look at that poem she wrote when she was in school
and took the prize with; it’s the best poem I ever read in my life, and
she’d never even tried to write one before. It’s the finest thing I
ever read, and R. T. Bloss said so, too; and I guess he’s a good enough
literary judge for me--turns out more advertisin’ liter’cher than any
man in the city. I tell you she’s smart! Look at the way she worked me
to get me to promise the New House--and I guess you had your finger
in that, too, mamma! This old shack’s good enough for me, but you and
little Edie ‘ll have to have your way. I’ll get behind her and push her
the same as I will Jim and Roscoe. I tell you I’m mighty proud o’ them
three chuldern! But Bibbs--” He paused, shaking his head. “Honest,
mamma, when I talk to men that got ALL their boys doin’ well and worth
their salt, why, I have to keep my mind on Jim and Roscoe and forget
about Bibbs.”

Mrs. Sheridan tossed her head fretfully upon the pillow. “You did the
best you could, papa,” she said, impatiently, “so come to bed and quit
reproachin’ yourself for it.”

He glared at her indignantly. “Reproachin’ myself!” he snorted. “I ain’t
doin’ anything of the kind! What in the name o’ goodness would I want
to reproach myself for? And it wasn’t the ‘best I could,’ either. It was
the best ANYBODY could! I was givin’ him a chance to show what was
in him and make a man of himself--and here he goes and gets ‘nervous
dyspepsia’ on me!”

He went to the old-fashioned gas-fixture, turned out the light, and
muttered his way morosely into bed.

“What?” said his wife, crossly, bothered by a subsequent mumbling.

“More like hook-worm, I said,” he explained, speaking louder. “I don’t
know what to do with him!”



CHAPTER III

Beginning at the beginning and learning from the ground up was a long
course for Bibbs at the sanitarium, with milk and “zwieback” as the
basis of instruction; and the months were many and tiresome before he
was considered near enough graduation to go for a walk leaning on a
nurse and a cane. These and subsequent months saw the planning, the
building, and the completion of the New House; and it was to that abode
of Bigness that Bibbs was brought when the cane, without the nurse, was
found sufficient to his support.

Edith met him at the station. “Well, well, Bibbs!” she said, as he came
slowly through the gates, the last of all the travelers from that train.
She gave his hand a brisk little shake, averting her eyes after a quick
glance at him, and turning at once toward the passage to the street. “Do
you think they ought to’ve let you come? You certainly don’t look well!”

“But I certainly do look better,” he returned, in a voice as slow as
his gait; a drawl that was a necessity, for when Bibbs tried to speak
quickly he stammered. “Up to about a month ago it took two people to see
me. They had to get me in a line between ‘em!”

Edith did not turn her eyes directly toward him again, after her first
quick glance; and her expression, in spite of her, showed a faint,
troubled distaste, the look of a healthy person pressed by some
obligation of business to visit a “bad” ward in a hospital. She was
nineteen, fair and slim, with small, unequal features, but a prettiness
of color and a brilliancy of eyes that created a total impression close
upon beauty. Her movements were eager and restless: there was something
about her, as kind old ladies say, that was very sweet; and there was
something that was hurried and breathless. This was new to Bibbs; it was
a perceptible change since he had last seen her, and he bent upon her
a steady, whimsical scrutiny as they stood at the curb, waiting for an
automobile across the street to disengage itself from the traffic.

“That’s the new car,” she said. “Everything’s new. We’ve got four now,
besides Jim’s. Roscoe’s got two.”

“Edith, you look--” he began, and paused.

“Oh, WE’re all well,” she said, briskly; and then, as if something in
his tone had caught her as significant, “Well, HOW do I look, Bibbs?”

“You look--” He paused again, taking in the full length of her--her trim
brown shoes, her scant, tapering, rough skirt, and her coat of brown
and green, her long green tippet and her mad little rough hat in the mad
mode--all suited to the October day.

“How do I look?” she insisted.

“You look,” he answered, as his examination ended upon an incrusted
watch of platinum and enamel at her wrist, “you look--expensive!” That
was a substitute for what he intended to say, for her constraint and
preoccupation, manifested particularly in her keeping her direct
glance away from him, did not seem to grant the privilege of impulsive
intimacies.

“I expect I am!” she laughed, and sidelong caught the direction of his
glance. “Of course I oughtn’t to wear it in the daytime--it’s an evening
thing, for the theater--but my day wrist-watch is out of gear. Bobby
Lamhorn broke it yesterday; he’s a regular rowdy sometimes. Do you want
Claus to help you in?”

“Oh no,” said Bibbs. “I’m alive.” And after a fit of panting subsequent
to his climbing into the car unaided, he added, “Of course, I have to
TELL people!”

“We only got your telegram this morning,” she said, as they began to
move rapidly through the “wholesale district” neighboring the station.
“Mother said she’d hardly expected you this month.”

“They seemed to be through with me up there in the country,” he
explained, gently. “At least they said they were, and they wouldn’t keep
me any longer, because so many really sick people wanted to get in. They
told me to go home--and I didn’t have any place else to go. It’ll be all
right, Edith; I’ll sit in the woodshed until after dark every day.”

“Pshaw!” She laughed nervously. “Of course we’re all of us glad to have
you back.”

“Yes?” he said. “Father?”

“Of course! Didn’t he write and tell you to come home?” She did not turn
to him with the question. All the while she rode with her face directly
forward.

“No,” he said; “father hasn’t written.”

She flushed a little. “I expect I ought to’ve written sometime, or one
of the boys--”

“Oh no; that was all right.”

“You can’t think how busy we’ve all been this year, Bibbs. I often
planned to write--and then, just as I was going to, something would turn
up. And I’m sure it’s been just the same way with Jim and Roscoe. Of
course we knew mamma was writing often and--”

“Of course!” he said, readily. “There’s a chunk of coal fallen on your
glove, Edith. Better flick it off before it smears. My word! I’d almost
forgotten how sooty it is here.”

“We’ve been having very bright weather this month--for us.” She blew the
flake of soot into the air, seeming relieved.

He looked up at the dingy sky, wherein hung the disconsolate sun like
a cold tin pan nailed up in a smoke-house by some lunatic, for a
decoration. “Yes,” said Bibbs. “It’s very gay.” A few moments later, as
they passed a corner, “Aren’t we going home?” he asked.

“Why, yes! Did you want to go somewhere else first?”

“No. Your new driver’s taking us out of the way, isn’t he?”

“No. This is right. We’re going straight home.”

“But we’ve passed the corner. We always turned--”

“Good gracious!” she cried. “Didn’t you know we’d moved? Didn’t you know
we were in the New House?”

“Why, no!” said Bibbs. “Are you?”

“We’ve been there a month! Good gracious! Didn’t you know--” She broke
off, flushing again, and then went on hastily: “Of course, mamma’s never
been so busy in her life; we ALL haven’t had time to do anything but
keep on the hop. Mamma couldn’t even come to the station to-day. Papa’s
got some of his business friends and people from around the
OLD-house neighborhood coming to-night for a big dinner and
‘house-warming’--dreadful kind of people--but mamma’s got it all on her
hands. She’s never sat down a MINUTE; and if she did, papa would have
her up again before--”

“Of course,” said Bibbs. “Do you like the new place, Edith?”

“I don’t like some of the things father WOULD have in it, but it’s the
finest house in town, and that ought to be good enough for me! Papa
bought one thing I like--a view of the Bay of Naples in oil that’s
perfectly beautiful; it’s the first thing you see as you come in the
front hall, and it’s eleven feet long. But he would have that old
fruit picture we had in the Murphy Street house hung up in the new
dining-room. You remember it--a table and a watermelon sliced open,
and a lot of rouged-looking apples and some shiny lemons, with two dead
prairie-chickens on a chair? He bought it at a furniture-store years and
years ago, and he claims it’s a finer picture than any they saw in the
museums, that time he took mamma to Europe. But it’s horribly out of
date to have those things in dining-rooms, and I caught Bobby Lamhorn
giggling at it; and Sibyl made fun of it, too, with Bobby, and then told
papa she agreed with him about its being such a fine thing, and said he
did just right to insist on having it where he wanted it. She makes me
tired! Sibyl!”

Edith’s first constraint with her brother, amounting almost to
awkwardness, vanished with this theme, though she still kept her full
gaze always to the front, even in the extreme ardor of her denunciation
of her sister-in-law.

“SIBYL!” she repeated, with such heat and vigor that the name seemed
to strike fire on her lips. “I’d like to know why Roscoe couldn’t have
married somebody from HERE that would have done us some good! He could
have got in with Bobby Lamhorn years ago just as well as now, and
Bobby’d have introduced him to the nicest girls in town, but instead of
that he had to go and pick up this Sibyl Rink! I met some awfully
nice people from her town when mamma and I were at Atlantic City, last
spring, and not one had ever heard of the Rinks! Not even HEARD of ‘em!”

“I thought you were great friends with Sibyl,” Bibbs said.

“Up to the time I found her out!” the sister returned, with continuing
vehemence. “I’ve found out some things about Mrs. Roscoe Sheridan
lately--”

“It’s only lately?”

“Well--” Edith hesitated, her lips setting primly. “Of course, I
always did see that she never cared the snap of her little finger about
ROSCOE!”

“It seems,” said Bibbs, in laconic protest, “that she married him.”

The sister emitted a shrill cry, to be interpreted as contemptuous
laughter, and, in her emotion, spoke too impulsively: “Why, she’d have
married YOU!”

“No, no,” he said; “she couldn’t be that bad!”

“I didn’t mean--” she began, distressed. “I only meant--I didn’t mean--”

“Never mind, Edith,” he consoled her. “You see, she couldn’t have
married me, because I didn’t know her; and besides, if she’s as
mercenary as all that she’d have been too clever. The head doctor even
had to lend me the money for my ticket home.”

“I didn’t mean anything unpleasant about YOU,” Edith babbled. “I only
meant I thought she was the kind of girl who was so simply crazy to
marry somebody she’d have married anybody that asked her.”

“Yes, yes,” said Bibbs, “it’s all straight.” And, perceiving that
his sister’s expression was that of a person whose adroitness has set
matters perfectly to rights, he chuckled silently.

“Roscoe’s perfectly lovely to her,” she continued, a moment later. “Too
lovely! If he’d wake up a little and lay down the law, some day, like a
MAN, I guess she’d respect him more and learn to behave herself!”

“‘Behave’?”

“Oh, well, I mean she’s so insincere,” said Edith, characteristically
evasive when it came to stating the very point to which she had led, and
in this not unique of her sex.

Bibbs contented himself with a non-committal gesture. “Business
is crawling up the old streets,” he said, his long, tremulous hand
indicating a vasty structure in course of erection. “The boarding-houses
come first and then the--”

“That isn’t for shops,” she informed him. “That’s a new investment of
papa’s--the ‘Sheridan Apartments.’”

“Well, well,” he murmured. “I supposed ‘Sheridan’ was almost well enough
known here already.”

“Oh, we’re well enough known ABOUT!” she said, impatiently. “I guess
there isn’t a man, woman, child, or nigger baby in town that doesn’t
know who we are. But we aren’t in with the right people.”

“No!” he exclaimed. “Who’s all that?”

“Who’s all what?”

“The ‘right people.’”

“You know what I mean: the best people, the old families--the people
that have the real social position in this town and that know they’ve
got it.”

Bibbs indulged in his silent chuckle again; he seemed greatly amused. “I
thought that the people who actually had the real what-you-may-call-it
didn’t know it,” he said. “I’ve always understood that it was very
unsatisfactory, because if you thought about it you didn’t have it, and
if you had it you didn’t know it.”

“That’s just bosh,” she retorted. “They know it in this town, all right!
I found out a lot of things, long before we began to think of building
out in this direction. The right people in this town aren’t always the
society-column ones, and they mix around with outsiders, and they don’t
all belong to any one club--they’re taken in all sorts into all their
clubs--but they’re a clan, just the same; and they have the clan feeling
and they’re just as much We, Us and Company as any crowd you read about
anywhere in the world. Most of ‘em were here long before papa came, and
the grandfathers of the girls of my age knew each other, and--”

“I see,” Bibbs interrupted, gravely. “Their ancestors fled together
from many a stricken field, and Crusaders’ blood flows in their veins. I
always understood the first house was built by an old party of the name
of Vertrees who couldn’t get along with Dan’l Boone, and hurried away to
these parts because Dan’l wanted him to give back a gun he’d lent him.”

Edith gave a little ejaculation of alarm. “You mustn’t repeat that
story, Bibbs, even if it’s true. The Vertreeses are THE best family, and
of course the very oldest here; they were an old family even before
Mary Vertrees’s great-great-grandfather came west and founded this
settlement. He came from Lynn, Massachusetts, and they have relatives
there YET--some of the best people in Lynn!”

“No!” exclaimed Bibbs, incredulously.

“And there are other old families like the Vertreeses,” she went on,
not heeding him; “the Lamhorns and the Kittersbys and the J. Palmerston
Smiths--”

“Strange names to me,” he interrupted. “Poor things! None of them have
my acquaintance.”

“No, that’s just it!” she cried. “And papa had never even heard the name
of Vertrees! Mrs. Vertrees went with some anti-smoke committee to see
him, and he told her that smoke was what made her husband bring home his
wages from the pay-roll on Saturday night! HE told us about it, and I
thought I just couldn’t live through the night, I was so ashamed! Mr.
Vertrees has always lived on his income, and papa didn’t know him, of
course. They’re the stiffist, most elegant people in the whole town. And
to crown it all, papa went and bought the next lot to the old Vertrees
country mansion--it’s in the very heart of the best new residence
district now, and that’s where the New House is, right next door to
them--and I must say it makes their place look rather shabby! I met Mary
Vertrees when I joined the Mission Service Helpers, but she never did
any more than just barely bow to me, and since papa’s break I doubt if
she’ll do that! They haven’t called.”

“And you think if I spread this gossip about Vertrees the First stealing
Dan’l Boone’s gun, the chances that they WILL call--”

“Papa knows what a break he made with Mrs. Vertrees. I made him
understand that,” said Edith, demurely, “and he’s promised to try and
meet Mr. Vertrees and be nice to him. It’s just this way: if we don’t
know THEM, it’s practically no use in our having build the New House;
and if we DO know them and they’re decent to us, we’re right with the
right people. They can do the whole thing for us. Bobby Lamhorn told
Sibyl he was going to bring his mother to call on her and on mamma, but
it was weeks ago, and I notice he hasn’t done it; and if Mrs. Vertrees
decides not to know us, I’m darn sure Mrs Lamhorn’ll never come. That’s
ONE thing Sibyl didn’t manage! She SAID Bobby offered to bring his
mother--”

“You say he is a friend of Roscoe’s?” Bibbs asked.

“Oh, he’s a friend of the whole family,” she returned, with a petulance
which she made an effort to disguise. “Roscoe and he got acquainted
somewhere, and they take him to the theater about every other night.
Sibyl has him to lunch, too, and keeps--” She broke off with an angry
little jerk of the head. “We can see the New House from the second
corner ahead. Roscoe has built straight across the street from us, you
know. Honestly, Sibyl makes me think of a snake, sometimes--the way
she pulls the wool over people’s eyes! She honeys up to papa and gets
anything in the world she wants out of him, and then makes fun of him
behind his back--yes, and to his face, but HE can’t see it! She got
him to give her a twelve-thousand-dollar porch for their house after it
was--”

“Good heavens!” said Bibbs, staring ahead as they reached the corner and
the car swung to the right, following a bend in the street. “Is that the
New House?”

“Yes. What do you think of it?”

“Well,” he drawled, “I’m pretty sure the sanitarium’s about half a size
bigger; I can’t be certain till I measure.”

And a moment later, as they entered the driveway, he added, seriously:
“But it’s beautiful!”



CHAPTER IV

It was gray stone, with long roofs of thick green slate. An architect
who loved the milder “Gothic motives” had built what he liked: it was to
be seen at once that he had been left unhampered, and he had wrought a
picture out of his head into a noble and exultant reality. At the same
time a landscape-designer had played so good a second, with ready-made
accessories of screen, approach and vista, that already whatever look
of newness remained upon the place was to its advantage, as showing at
least one thing yet clean under the grimy sky. For, though the smoke was
thinner in this direction, and at this long distance from the heart
of the town, it was not absent, and under tutelage of wind and weather
could be malignant even here, where cows had wandered in the meadows and
corn had been growing not ten years gone.

Altogether, the New House was a success. It was one of those architects’
successes which leave the owners veiled in privacy; it revealed nothing
of the people who lived in it save that they were rich. There are houses
that cannot be detached from their own people without protesting: every
inch of mortar seems to mourn the separation, and such a house--no
matter what be done to it--is ever murmurous with regret, whispering the
old name sadly to itself unceasingly. But the New House was of a kind
to change hands without emotion. In our swelling cities, great places
of its type are useful as financial gauges of the business tides;
rich families, one after another, take title and occupy such houses as
fortunes rise and fall--they mark the high tide. It was impossible to
imagine a child’s toy wagon left upon a walk or driveway of the New
House, and yet it was--as Bibbs rightly called it--“beautiful.”

What the architect thought of the “Golfo di Napoli,” which hung in its
vast gold revel of rococo frame against the gray wood of the hall, is to
be conjectured--perhaps he had not seen it.

“Edith, did you say only eleven feet?” Bibbs panted, staring at it, as
the white-jacketed twin of a Pullman porter helped him to get out of his
overcoat.

“Eleven without the frame,” she explained. “It’s splendid, don’t you
think? It lightens things up so. The hall was kind of gloomy before.”

“No gloom now!” said Bibbs.

“This statue in the corner is pretty, too,” she remarked. “Mamma and I
bought that.” And Bibbs turned at her direction to behold, amid a
grove of tubbed palms, a “life-size,” black-bearded Moor, of a plastic
composition painted with unappeasable gloss and brilliancy. Upon his
chocolate head he wore a gold turban; in his hand he held a gold-tipped
spear; and for the rest, he was red and yellow and black and silver.

“Hallelujah!” was the sole comment of the returned wanderer, and Edith,
saying she would “find mamma,” left him blinking at the Moor. Presently,
after she had disappeared, he turned to the colored man who stood
waiting, Bibbs’s traveling-bag in his hand. “What do YOU think of it?”
 Bibbs asked, solemnly.

“Gran’!” replied the servitor. “She mighty hard to dus’. Dus’ git in all
‘em wrinkles. Yessuh, she mighty hard to dus’.”

“I expect she must be,” said Bibbs, his glance returning reflectively
to the black bull beard for a moment. “Is there a place anywhere I could
lie down?”

“Yessuh. We got one nem spare rooms all fix up fo’ you, suh. Right up
staihs, suh. Nice room.”

He led the way, and Bibbs followed slowly, stopping at intervals to
rest, and noting a heavy increase in the staff of service since the
exodus from the “old” house. Maids and scrubwomen were at work under the
patently nominal direction of another Pullman porter, who was profoundly
enjoying his own affectation of being harassed with care.

“Ev’ything got look spick an’ span fo’ the big doin’s to-night,” Bibbs’s
guide explained, chuckling. “Yessuh, we got big doin’s to-night! Big
doin’s!”

The room to which he conducted his lagging charge was furnished in
every particular like a room in a new hotel; and Bibbs found it
pleasant--though, indeed, any room with a good bed would have
seemed pleasant to him after his journey. He stretched himself flat
immediately, and having replied “Not now” to the attendant’s offer to
unpack the bag, closed his eyes wearily.

White-jacket, racially sympathetic, lowered the window-shades and made
an exit on tiptoe, encountering the other white-jacket--the harassed
overseer--in the hall without. Said the emerging one: “He mighty shaky,
Mist’ Jackson. Drop right down an’ shet his eyes. Eyelids all black.
Rich folks gotta go same as anybody else. Anybody ast me if I change
‘ith ‘at ole boy--No, suh! Le’m keep ‘is money; I keep my black skin an’
keep out the ground!”

Mr. Jackson expressed the same preference. “Yessuh, he look tuh me like
somebody awready laid out,” he concluded. And upon the stairway landing,
near by, two old women, on all-fours at their work, were likewise
pessimistic.

“Hech!” said one, lamenting in a whisper. “It give me a turn to see him
go by--white as wax an’ bony as a dead fish! Mrs. Cronin, tell me: d’it
make ye kind o’ sick to look at um?”

“Sick? No more than the face of a blessed angel already in heaven!”

“Well,” said the other, “I’d a b’y o’ me own come home t’ die once--”
 She fell silent at a rustling of skirts in the corridor above them.

It was Mrs. Sheridan hurrying to greet her son.

She was one of those fat, pink people who fade and contract with age
like drying fruit; and her outside was a true portrait of her. Her
husband and her daughter had long ago absorbed her. What intelligence
she had was given almost wholly to comprehending and serving those
two, and except in the presence of one of them she was nearly always
absent-minded. Edith lived all day with her mother, as daughters do; and
Sheridan so held his wife to her unity with him that she had long ago
become unconscious of her existence as a thing separate from his. She
invariably perceived his moods, and nursed him through them when she
did not share them; and she gave him a profound sympathy with the inmost
spirit and purpose of his being, even though she did not comprehend it
and partook of it only as a spectator. They had known but one actual
altercation in their lives, and that was thirty years past, in the early
days of Sheridan’s struggle, when, in order to enhance the favorable
impression he believed himself to be making upon some capitalists, he
had thought it necessary to accompany them to a performance of “The
Black Crook.” But she had not once referred to this during the last ten
years.

Mrs. Sheridan’s manner was hurried and inconsequent; her clothes rustled
more than other women’s clothes; she seemed to wear too many at a time
and to be vaguely troubled by them, and she was patting a skirt down
over some unruly internal dissension at the moment she opened Bibbs’s
door.

At sight of the recumbent figure she began to close the door softly,
withdrawing, but the young man had heard the turning of the knob and the
rustling of skirts, and he opened his eyes.

“Don’t go, mother,” he said. “I’m not asleep.” He swung his long legs
over the side of the bed to rise, but she set a hand on his shoulder,
restraining him; and he lay flat again.

“No,” she said, bending over to kiss his cheek, “I just come for a
minute, but I want to see how you seem. Edith said--”

“Poor Edith!” he murmured. “She couldn’t look at me. She--”

“Nonsense!” Mrs. Sheridan, having let in the light at a window, came
back to the bedside. “You look a great deal better than what you did
before you went to the sanitarium, anyway. It’s done you good; a body
can see that right away. You need fatting up, of course, and you haven’t
got much color--”

“No,” he said, “I haven’t much color.”

“But you will have when you get your strength back.”

“Oh yes!” he responded, cheerfully. “THEN I will.”

“You look a great deal better than what I expected.”

“Edith must have a great vocabulary!” he chuckled.

“She’s too sensitive,” said Mrs. Sheridan, “and it makes her exaggerate
a little. What about your diet?”

“That’s all right. They told me to eat anything.”

“Anything at all?”

“Well--anything I could.”

“That’s good,” she said, nodding. “They mean for you just to build up
your strength. That’s what they told me the last time I went to see you
at the sanitarium. You look better than what you did then, and that’s
only a little time ago. How long was it?”

“Eight months, I think.”

“No, it couldn’t be. I know it ain’t THAT long, but maybe it was
longer’n I thought. And this last month or so I haven’t had scarcely
even time to write more than just a line to ask how you were gettin’
along, but I told Edith to write, the weeks I couldn’t, and I asked
Jim to, too, and they both said they would, so I suppose you’ve kept up
pretty well on the home news.”

“Oh yes.”

“What I think you need,” said the mother, gravely, “is to liven up a
little and take an interest in things. That’s what papa was sayin’ this
morning, after we got your telegram; and that’s what’ll stimilate your
appetite, too. He was talkin’ over his plans for you--”

“Plans?” Bibbs, turning on his side, shielded his eyes from the light
with his hand, so that he might see her better. “What--” He paused.
“What plans is he making for me, mother?”

She turned away, going back to the window to draw down the shade.
“Well, you better talk it over with HIM,” she said, with perceptible
nervousness. “He better tell you himself. I don’t feel as if I had any
call, exactly, to go into it; and you better get to sleep now, anyway.”
 She came and stood by the bedside once more. “But you must remember,
Bibbs, whatever papa does is for the best. He loves his chuldern and
wants to do what’s right by ALL of ‘em--and you’ll always find he’s
right in the end.”

He made a little gesture of assent, which seemed to content her; and
she rustled to the door, turning to speak again after she had opened it.
“You get a good nap, now, so as to be all rested up for to-night.”

“You--you mean--he--” Bibbs stammered, having begun to speak too
quickly. Checking himself, he drew a long breath, then asked, quietly,
“Does father expect me to come down-stairs this evening?”

“Well, I think he does,” she answered. “You see, it’s the
‘house-warming,’ as he calls it, and he said he thinks all our chuldern
ought to be around us, as well as the old friends and other folks. It’s
just what he thinks you need--to take an interest and liven up. You
don’t feel too bad to come down, do you?”

“Mother?”

“Well?”

“Take a good look at me,” he said.

“Oh, see here!” she cried, with brusque cheerfulness. “You’re not so bad
off as you think you are, Bibbs. You’re on the mend; and it won’t do you
any harm to please your--”

“It isn’t that,” he interrupted. “Honestly, I’m only afraid it might
spoil somebody’s appetite. Edith--”

“I told you the child was too sensitive,” she interrupted, in turn.
“You’re a plenty good-lookin’ enough young man for anybody! You look
like you been through a long spell and begun to get well, and that’s all
there is to it.”

“All right. I’ll come to the party. If the rest of you can stand it, I
can!”

“It ‘ll do you good,” she returned, rustling into the hall. “Now take
a nap, and I’ll send one o’ the help to wake you in time for you to get
dressed up before dinner. You go to sleep right away, now, Bibbs!”

Bibbs was unable to obey, though he kept his eyes closed. Something
she had said kept running in his mind, repeating itself over and over
interminably. “His plans for you--his plans for you--his plans for
you--his plans for you--” And then, taking the place of “his plans for
you,” after what seemed a long, long while, her flurried voice came
back to him insistently, seeming to whisper in his ear: “He loves his
chuldern--he loves his chuldern--he loves his chuldern”--“you’ll find
he’s always right--you’ll find he’s always right--” Until at last, as he
drifted into the state of half-dreams and distorted realities, the voice
seemed to murmur from beyond a great black wing that came out of the
wall and stretched over his bed--it was a black wing within the room,
and at the same time it was a black cloud crossing the sky, bridging the
whole earth from pole to pole. It was a cloud of black smoke, and out
of the heart of it came a flurried voice whispering over and over, “His
plans for you--his plans for you--his plans for you--” And then there
was nothing.

He woke refreshed, stretched himself gingerly--as one might have a care
against too quick or too long a pull upon a frayed elastic--and, getting
to his feet, went blinking to the window and touched the shade so that
it flew up, letting in a pale sunset.

He looked out into the lemon-colored light and smiled wanly at the
next house, as Edith’s grandiose phrase came to mind, “the old Vertrees
country mansion.” It stood in a broad lawn which was separated from the
Sheridans’ by a young hedge; and it was a big, square, plain old box
of a house with a giant salt-cellar atop for a cupola. Paint had been
spared for a long time, and no one could have put a name to the color of
it, but in spite of that the place had no look of being out at heel, and
the sward was as neatly trimmed as the Sheridans’ own.

The separating hedge ran almost beneath Bibbs’s window--for this wing of
the New House extended here almost to the edge of the lot--and, directly
opposite the window, the Vertreeses’ lawn had been graded so as to make
a little knoll upon which stood a small rustic “summer-house.” It was
almost on a level with Bibbs’s window and not thirty feet away; and
it was easy for him to imagine the present dynasty of Vertreeses
in grievous outcry when they had found this retreat ruined by the
juxtaposition of the parvenu intruder. Probably the “summer-house” was
pleasant and pretty in summer. It had the look of a place wherein little
girls had played for a generation or so with dolls and “housekeeping,”
 or where a lovely old lady might come to read something dull on warm
afternoons; but now in the thin light it was desolate, the color of
dust, and hung with haggard vines which had lost their leaves.

Bibbs looked at it with grave sympathy, probably feeling some kinship
with anything so dismantled; then he turned to a cheval-glass beside the
window and paid himself the dubious tribute of a thorough inspection. He
looked the mirror up and down, slowly, repeatedly, but came in the end
to a long and earnest scrutiny of the face. Throughout this cryptic
seance his manner was profoundly impersonal; he had the air of an
entomologist intent upon classifying a specimen, but finally he appeared
to become pessimistic. He shook his head solemnly; then gazed again
and shook his head again, and continued to shake it slowly, in complete
disapproval.

“You certainly are one horrible sight!” he said, aloud.

And at that he was instantly aware of an observer. Turning quickly,
he was vouchsafed the picture of a charming lady, framed in a
rustic aperture of the “summer-house” and staring full into his
window--straight into his eyes, too, for the infinitesimal fraction of
a second before the flashingly censorious withdrawal of her own.
Composedly, she pulled several dead twigs from a vine, the manner of her
action conveying a message or proclamation to the effect that she was in
the summer-house for the sole purpose of such-like pruning and tending,
and that no gentleman could suppose her presence there to be due to any
other purpose whatsoever, or that, being there on that account, she
had allowed her attention to wander for one instant in the direction of
things of which she was in reality unconscious.

Having pulled enough twigs to emphasize her unconsciousness--and at the
same time her disapproval--of everything in the nature of a Sheridan
or belonging to a Sheridan, she descended the knoll with maintained
composure, and sauntered toward a side-door of the country mansion of
the Vertreeses. An elderly lady, bonneted and cloaked, opened the door
and came to meet her.

“Are you ready, Mary? I’ve been looking for you. What were you doing?”

“Nothing. Just looking into one of Sheridans’ windows,” said Mary
Vertrees. “I got caught at it.”

“Mary!” cried her mother. “Just as we were going to call! Good heavens!”

“We’ll go, just the same,” the daughter returned. “I suppose those women
would be glad to have us if we’d burned their house to the ground.”

“But WHO saw you?” insisted Mrs. Vertrees.

“One of the sons, I suppose he was. I believe he’s insane, or something.
At least I hear they keep him in a sanitarium somewhere, and never talk
about him. He was staring at himself in a mirror and talking to himself.
Then he looked out and caught me.”

“What did he--”

“Nothing, of course.”

“How did he look?”

“Like a ghost in a blue suit,” said Miss Vertrees, moving toward the
street and waving a white-gloved hand in farewell to her father, who
was observing them from the window of his library. “Rather tragic and
altogether impossible. Do come on, mother, and let’s get it over!”

And Mrs. Vertrees, with many misgivings, set forth with her daughter for
their gracious assault upon the New House next door.



CHAPTER V

Mr. Vertrees, having watched their departure with the air of a man who
had something at hazard upon the expedition, turned from the window and
began to pace the library thoughtfully, pending their return. He was
about sixty; a small man, withered and dry and fine, a trim little
sketch of an elderly dandy. His lambrequin mustache--relic of a
forgotten Anglomania--had been profoundly black, but now, like his
smooth hair, it was approaching an equally sheer whiteness; and though
his clothes were old, they had shapeliness and a flavor of mode. And for
greater spruceness there were some jaunty touches; gray spats, a narrow
black ribbon across the gray waistcoat to the eye-glasses in a pocket,
a fleck of color from a button in the lapel of the black coat, labeling
him the descendant of patriot warriors.

The room was not like him, being cheerful and hideous, whereas Mr.
Vertrees was anxious and decorative. Under a mantel of imitation black
marble a merry little coal-fire beamed forth upon high and narrow
“Eastlake” bookcases with long glass doors, and upon comfortable,
incongruous furniture, and upon meaningless “woodwork” everywhere,
and upon half a dozen Landseer engravings which Mr. and Mrs. Vertrees
sometimes mentioned to each other, after thirty years of possession, as
“very fine things.” They had been the first people in town to possess
Landseer engravings, and there, in art, they had rested, but they still
had a feeling that in all such matters they were in the van; and when
Mr. Vertrees discovered Landseers upon the walls of other people’s
houses he thawed, as a chieftain to a trusted follower; and if he
found an edition of Bulwer Lytton accompanying the Landseers as a final
corroboration of culture, he would say, inevitably, “Those people know
good pictures and they know good books.”

The growth of the city, which might easily have made him a millionaire,
had ruined him because he had failed to understand it. When towns begin
to grow they have whims, and the whims of a town always ruin somebody.
Mr. Vertrees had been most strikingly the somebody in this case. At
about the time he bought the Landseers, he owned, through inheritance,
an office-building and a large house not far from it, where he spent the
winter; and he had a country place--a farm of four hundred acres--where
he went for the summers to the comfortable, ugly old house that was his
home now, perforce, all the year round. If he had known how to sit
still and let things happen he would have prospered miraculously; but,
strangely enough, the dainty little man was one of the first to fall
down and worship Bigness, the which proceeded straightway to enact the
role of Juggernaut for his better education. He was a true prophet of
the prodigious growth, but he had a fatal gift for selling good and
buying bad. He should have stayed at home and looked at his Landseers
and read his Bulwer, but he took his cow to market, and the trained
milkers milked her dry and then ate her. He sold the office-building and
the house in town to buy a great tract of lots in a new suburb; then
he sold the farm, except the house and the ground about it, to pay the
taxes on the suburban lots and to “keep them up.” The lots refused to
stay up; but he had to do something to keep himself and his family up,
so in despair he sold the lots (which went up beautifully the next year)
for “traction stock” that was paying dividends; and thereafter he ceased
to buy and sell. Thus he disappeared altogether from the commercial
surface at about the time James Sheridan came out securely on top; and
Sheridan, until Mrs. Vertrees called upon him with her “anti-smoke”
 committee, had never heard the name.

Mr. Vertrees, pinched, retired to his Landseers, and Mrs. Vertrees
“managed somehow” on the dividends, though “managing” became more and
more difficult as the years went by and money bought less and less. But
there came a day when three servitors of Bigness in Philadelphia took
greedy counsel with four fellow-worshipers from New York, and not long
after that there were no more dividends for Mr. Vertrees. In fact, there
was nothing for Mr. Vertrees, because the “traction stock” henceforth
was no stock at all, and he had mortgaged his house long ago to help
“manage somehow” according to his conception of his “position in
life”--one of his own old-fashioned phrases. Six months before the
completion of the New House next door, Mr. Vertrees had sold his horses
and the worn Victoria and “station-wagon,” to pay the arrears of his two
servants and re-establish credit at the grocer’s and butcher’s--and a
pair of elderly carriage-horses with such accoutrements are not very
ample barter, in these days, for six months’ food and fuel and service.
Mr. Vertrees had discovered, too, that there was no salary for him in
all the buzzing city--he could do nothing.

It may be said that he was at the end of his string. Such times do come
in all their bitterness, finally, to the man with no trade or craft, if
his feeble clutch on that slippery ghost, Property, shall fail.

The windows grew black while he paced the room, and smoky twilight
closed round about the house, yet not more darkly than what closed round
about the heart of the anxious little man patrolling the fan-shaped zone
of firelight. But as the mantel clock struck wheezily six there was the
rattle of an outer door, and a rich and beautiful peal of laughter went
ringing through the house. Thus cheerfully did Mary Vertrees herald her
return with her mother from their expedition among the barbarians.

She came rushing into the library and threw herself into a deep chair by
the hearth, laughing so uncontrollably that tears were in her eyes. Mrs.
Vertrees followed decorously, no mirth about her; on the contrary,
she looked vaguely disturbed, as if she had eaten something not quite
certain to agree with her, and regretted it.

“Papa! Oh, oh!” And Miss Vertrees was fain to apply a handkerchief upon
her eyes. “I’m SO glad you made us go! I wouldn’t have missed it--”

Mrs. Vertrees shook her head. “I suppose I’m very dull,” she said,
gently. “I didn’t see anything amusing. They’re most ordinary, and the
house is altogether in bad taste, but we anticipated that, and--”

“Papa!” Mary cried, breaking in. “They asked us to DINNER!”

“What!”

“And I’m GOING!” she shouted, and was seized with fresh paroxysms.
“Think of it! Never in their house before; never met any of them but the
daughter--and just BARELY met her--”

“What about you?” interrupted Mr. Vertrees, turning sharply upon his
wife.

She made a little face as if positive now that what she had eaten would
not agree with her. “I couldn’t!” she said. “I--”

“Yes, that’s just--just the way she--she looked when they asked her!”
 cried Mary, choking. “And then she--she realized it, and tried to turn
it into a cough, and she didn’t know how, and it sounded like--like a
squeal!”

“I suppose,” said Mrs. Vertrees, much injured, “that Mary will have an
uproarious time at my funeral. She makes fun of--”

Mary jumped up instantly and kissed her; then she went to the mantel
and, leaning an elbow upon it, gazed thoughtfully at the buckle of her
shoe, twinkling in the firelight.

“THEY didn’t notice anything,” she said. “So far as they were concerned,
mamma, it was one of the finest coughs you ever coughed.”

“Who were ‘they’?” asked her father. “Whom did you see?”

“Only the mother and daughter,” Mary answered. “Mrs. Sheridan is dumpy
and rustly; and Miss Sheridan is pretty and pushing--dresses by the
fashion magazines and talks about New York people that have
their pictures in ‘em. She tutors the mother, but not very
successfully--partly because her own foundation is too flimsy and partly
because she began too late. They’ve got an enormous Moor of painted
plaster or something in the hall, and the girl evidently thought it was
to her credit that she selected it!”

“They have oil-paintings, too,” added Mrs. Vertrees, with a glance of
gentle price at the Landseers. “I’ve always thought oil-paintings in a
private house the worst of taste.”

“Oh, if one owned a Raphael or a Titian!” said Mr. Vertrees, finishing
the implication, not in words, but with a wave of his hand. “Go on,
Mary. None of the rest of them came in? You didn’t meet Mr. Sheridan
or--” He paused and adjusted a lump of coal in the fire delicately with
the poker. “Or one of the sons?”

Mary’s glance crossed his, at that, with a flash of utter comprehension.
He turned instantly away, but she had begun to laugh again.

“No,” she said, “no one except the women, but mamma inquired about the
sons thoroughly!”

“Mary!” Mrs. Vertrees protested.

“Oh, most adroitly, too!” laughed the girl. “Only she couldn’t help
unconsciously turning to look at me--when she did it!”

“Mary Vertrees!”

“Never mind, mamma! Mrs. Sheridan and Miss Sheridan neither of THEM
could help unconsciously turning to look at me--speculatively--at the
same time! They all three kept looking at me and talking about the
oldest son, Mr. James Sheridan, Junior. Mrs. Sheridan said his father is
very anxious ‘to get Jim to marry and settle down,’ and she assured me
that ‘Jim is right cultivated.’ Another of the sons, the youngest one,
caught me looking in the window this afternoon; but they didn’t seem
to consider him quite one of themselves, somehow, though Mrs. Sheridan
mentioned that a couple of years or so ago he had been ‘right sick,’
and had been to some cure or other. They seemed relieved to bring the
subject back to ‘Jim’ and his virtues--and to look at me! The other
brother is the middle one, Roscoe; he’s the one that owns the new house
across the street, where that young black-sheep of the Lamhorns, Robert,
goes so often. I saw a short, dark young man standing on the porch with
Robert Lamhorn there the other day, so I suppose that was Roscoe. ‘Jim’
still lurks in the mists, but I shall meet him to-night. Papa--” She
stepped nearer to him so that he had to face her, and his eyes were
troubled as he did. There may have been a trouble deep within her own,
but she kept their surface merry with laughter. “Papa, Bibbs is the
youngest one’s name, and Bibbs--to the best of our information--is a
lunatic. Roscoe is married. Papa, does it have to be Jim?”

“Mary!” Mrs. Vertrees cried, sharply. “You’re outrageous! That’s a
perfectly horrible way of talking!”

“Well, I’m close to twenty-four,” said Mary, turning to her. “I haven’t
been able to like anybody yet that’s asked me to marry him, and maybe I
never shall. Until a year or so ago I’ve had everything I ever wanted in
my life--you and papa gave it all to me--and it’s about time I began
to pay back. Unfortunately, I don’t know how to do anything--but
something’s got to be done.”

“But you needn’t talk of it like THAT!” insisted the mother,
plaintively. “It’s not--it’s not--”

“No, it’s not,” said Mary. “I know that!”

“How did they happen to ask you to dinner?” Mr. Vertrees inquired,
uneasily. “‘Stextrawdn’ry thing!”

“Climbers’ hospitality,” Mary defined it. “We were so very cordial and
easy! I think Mrs. Sheridan herself might have done it just as any kind
old woman on a farm might ask a neighbor, but it was Miss Sheridan who
did it. She played around it awhile; you could see she wanted to--she’s
in a dreadful hurry to get into things--and I fancied she had an idea it
might impress that Lamhorn boy to find us there to-night. It’s a sort of
house-warming dinner, and they talked about it and talked about it--and
then the girl got her courage up and blurted out the invitation. And
mamma--” Here Mary was once more a victim to incorrigible merriment.
“Mamma tried to say yes, and COULDN’T! She swallowed and squealed--I
mean you coughed, dear! And then, papa, she said that you and she had
promised to go to a lecture at the Emerson Club to-night, but that her
daughter would be delighted to come to the Big Show! So there I am,
and there’s Mr. Jim Sheridan--and there’s the clock. Dinner’s at
seven-thirty!”

And she ran out of the room, scooping up her fallen furs with a gesture
of flying grace as she sped.

When she came down, at twenty minutes after seven, her father stood in
the hall, at the foot of the stairs, waiting to be her escort through
the dark. He looked up and watched her as she descended, and his gaze
was fond and proud--and profoundly disturbed. But she smiled and nodded
gaily, and, when she reached the floor, put a hand on his shoulder.

“At least no one could suspect me to-night,” she said. “I LOOK rich,
don’t I, papa?”

She did. She had a look that worshipful girl friends bravely called
“regal.” A head taller than her father, she was as straight and jauntily
poised as a boy athlete; and her brown hair and her brown eyes were
like her mother’s, but for the rest she went back to some stronger and
livelier ancestor than either of her parents.

“Don’t I look too rich to be suspected?” she insisted.

“You look everything beautiful, Mary,” he said, huskily.

“And my dress?” She threw open her dark velvet cloak, showing a splendor
of white and silver. “Anything better at Nice next winter, do you
think?” She laughed, shrouding her glittering figure in the cloak again.
“Two years old, and no one would dream it! I did it over.”

“You can do anything, Mary.”

There was a curious humility in his tone, and something more--a
significance not veiled and yet abysmally apologetic. It was as if
he suggested something to her and begged her forgiveness in the same
breath.

And upon that, for the moment, she became as serious as he. She lifted
her hand from his shoulder and then set it back more firmly, so that he
should feel the reassurance of its pressure.

“Don’t worry,” she said, in a low voice and gravely. “I know exactly
what you want me to do.”



CHAPTER VI

It was a brave and lustrous banquet; and a noisy one, too, because there
was an orchestra among some plants at one end of the long dining-room,
and after a preliminary stiffness the guests were impelled to
converse--necessarily at the tops of their voices. The whole company
of fifty sat at a great oblong table, improvised for the occasion by
carpenters; but, not betraying itself as an improvisation, it seemed
a permanent continent of damask and lace, with shores of crystal and
silver running up to spreading groves of orchids and lilies and
white roses--an inhabited continent, evidently, for there were three
marvelous, gleaming buildings: one in the center and one at each end,
white miracles wrought by some inspired craftsman in sculptural icing.
They were models in miniature, and they represented the Sheridan
Building, the Sheridan Apartments, and the Pump Works. Nearly all the
guests recognized them without having to be told what they were, and
pronounced the likenesses superb.

The arrangement of the table was visibly baronial. At the head sat the
great Thane, with the flower of his family and of the guests about him;
then on each side came the neighbors of the “old” house, grading down to
vassals and retainers--superintendents, cashiers, heads of departments,
and the like--at the foot, where the Thane’s lady took her place as a
consolation for the less important. Here, too, among the thralls and
bondmen, sat Bibbs Sheridan, a meek Banquo, wondering how anybody could
look at him and eat.

Nevertheless, there was a vast, continuous eating, for these were
wholesome folk who understood that dinner meant something intended
for introduction into the system by means of an aperture in the face,
devised by nature for that express purpose. And besides, nobody looked
at Bibbs.

He was better content to be left to himself; his voice was not strong
enough to make itself heard over the hubbub without an exhausting
effort, and the talk that went on about him was too fast and too
fragmentary for his drawl to keep pace with it. So he felt relieved when
each of his neighbors in turn, after a polite inquiry about his health,
turned to seek livelier responses in other directions. For the talk
went on with the eating, incessantly. It rose over the throbbing of the
orchestra and the clatter and clinking of silver and china and glass,
and there was a mighty babble.

“Yes, sir! Started without a dollar.”... “Yellow flounces on the
overskirt--“... “I says, ‘Wilkie, your department’s got to go bigger
this year,’ I says.”... “Fifteen per cent. turnover in thirty-one
weeks.”... “One of the biggest men in the biggest--“... “The wife says
she’ll have to let out my pants if my appetite--“... “Say, did you see
that statue of a Turk in the hall? One of the finest things I ever--“...
“Not a dollar, not a nickel, not one red cent do you get out o’ me,’ I
says, and so he ups and--“... “Yes, the baby makes four, they’ve lost
now.”... “Well, they got their raise, and they went in big.”... “Yes,
sir! Not a dollar to his name, and look at what--“... “You wait! The
population of this town’s goin’ to hit the million mark before she
stops.”... “Well, if you can show me a bigger deal than--”

And through the interstices of this clamoring Bibbs could hear the
continual booming of his father’s heavy voice, and once he caught the
sentence, “Yes, young lady, that’s just what did it for me, and that’s
just what’ll do it for my boys--they got to make two blades o’ grass
grow where one grew before!” It was his familiar flourish, an old
story to Bibbs, and now jovially declaimed for the edification of Mary
Vertrees.

It was a great night for Sheridan--the very crest of his wave. He sat
there knowing himself Thane and master by his own endeavor; and his big,
smooth, red face grew more and more radiant with good will and with the
simplest, happiest, most boy-like vanity. He was the picture of health,
of good cheer, and of power on a holiday. He had thirty teeth, none
bought, and showed most of them when he laughed; his grizzled hair was
thick, and as unruly as a farm laborer’s; his chest was deep and big
beneath its vast facade of starched white linen, where little diamonds
twinkled, circling three large pearls; his hands were stubby and strong,
and he used them freely in gestures of marked picturesqueness; and,
though he had grown fat at chin and waist and wrist, he had not lost the
look of readiness and activity.

He dominated the table, shouting jocular questions and railleries at
every one. His idea was that when people were having a good time they
were noisy; and his own additions to the hubbub increased his pleasure,
and, of course, met the warmest encouragement from his guests. Edith had
discovered that he had very foggy notions of the difference between a
band and an orchestra, and when it was made clear to him he had held out
for a band until Edith threatened tears; but the size of the orchestra
they hired consoled him, and he had now no regrets in the matter.

He kept time to the music continually--with his feet, or pounding on the
table with his fist, and sometimes with spoon or knife upon his plate
or a glass, without permitting these side-products to interfere with the
real business of eating and shouting.

“Tell ‘em to play ‘Nancy Lee’!” he would bellow down the length of
the table to his wife, while the musicians were in the midst of the
“Toreador” song, perhaps. “Ask that fellow if they don’t know ‘Nancy
Lee’!” And when the leader would shake his head apologetically in answer
to an obedient shriek from Mrs. Sheridan, the “Toreador” continuing
vehemently, Sheridan would roar half-remembered fragments of “Nancy
Lee,” naturally mingling some Bizet with the air of that uxorious
tribute.

“Oh, there she stands and waves her hands while I’m away! A sail-er’s
wife a sail-er’s star should be! Yo ho, oh, oh! Oh, Nancy, Nancy, Nancy
Lee! Oh, Na-hancy Lee!”

“HAY, there, old lady!” he would bellow. “Tell ‘em to play ‘In the
Gloaming.’ In the gloaming, oh, my darling, la-la-lum-tee--Well, if they
don’t know that, what’s the matter with ‘Larboard Watch, Ahoy’? THAT’S
good music! That’s the kind o’ music I like! Come on, now! Mrs. Callin,
get ‘em singin’ down in your part o’ the table. What’s the matter you
folks down there, anyway? Larboard watch, ahoy!”

“What joy he feels, as--ta-tum-dum-tee-dee-dum steals. La-a-r-board
watch, ahoy!”

No external bubbling contributed to this effervescence; the Sheridans’
table had never borne wine, and, more because of timidity about it than
conviction, it bore none now; though “mineral waters” were copiously
poured from bottles wrapped, for some reason, in napkins, and proved
wholly satisfactory to almost all of the guests. And certainly no wine
could have inspired more turbulent good spirits in the host. Not even
Bibbs was an alloy in this night’s happiness, for, as Mrs. Sheridan had
said, he had “plans for Bibbs”--plans which were going to straighten out
some things that had gone wrong.

So he pounded the table and boomed his echoes of old songs, and then,
forgetting these, would renew his friendly railleries, or perhaps,
turning to Mary Vertrees, who sat near him, round the corner of the
table at his right, he would become autobiographical. Gentlemen less
naive than he had paid her that tribute, for she was a girl who inspired
the autobiographical impulse in every man who met her--it needed but the
sight of her.

The dinner seemed, somehow, to center about Mary Vertrees and the
jocund host as a play centers about its hero and heroine; they were the
rubicund king and the starry princess of this spectacle--they paid court
to each other, and everybody paid court to them. Down near the
sugar Pump Works, where Bibbs sat, there was audible speculation and
admiration. “Wonder who that lady is--makin’ such a hit with the old
man.” “Must be some heiress.” “Heiress? Golly, I guess I could stand it
to marry rich, then!”

Edith and Sibyl were radiant: at first they had watched Miss Vertrees
with an almost haggard anxiety, wondering what disasterous effect
Sheridan’s pastoral gaieties--and other things--would have upon her,
but she seemed delighted with everything, and with him most of all.
She treated him as if he were some delicious, foolish old joke that
she understood perfectly, laughing at him almost violently when he
bragged--probably his first experience of that kind in his life. It
enchanted him.

As he proclaimed to the table, she had “a way with her.” She had,
indeed, as Roscoe Sheridan, upon her right, discovered just after the
feast began. Since his marriage three years before, no lady had bestowed
upon him so protracted a full view of brilliant eyes; and, with the
look, his lovely neighbor said--and it was her first speech to him--

“I hope you’re very susceptible, Mr. Sheridan!”

Honest Roscoe was taken aback, and “Why?” was all he managed to say.

She repeated the look deliberately, which was noted, with a
mystification equal to his own, by his sister across the table. No one,
reflected Edith, could image Mary Vertrees the sort of girl who would
“really flirt” with married men--she was obviously the “opposite of all
that.” Edith defined her as a “thoroughbred,” a “nice girl”; and the
look given to Roscoe was astounding. Roscoe’s wife saw it, too, and
she was another whom it puzzled--though not because its recipient was
married.

“Because!” said Mary Vertrees, replying to Roscoe’s monosyllable. “And
also because we’re next-door neighbors at table, and it’s dull times
ahead for both of us if we don’t get along.”

Roscoe was a literal young man, all stocks and bonds, and he had been
brought up to believe that when a man married he “married and settled
down.” It was “all right,” he felt, for a man as old as his father to
pay florid compliments to as pretty a girl as this Miss Vertrees, but
for himself--“a young married man”--it wouldn’t do; and it wouldn’t
even be quite moral. He knew that young married people might have
friendships, like his wife’s for Lamhorn; but Sibyl and Lamhorn never
“flirted”--they were always very matter-of-fact with each other. Roscoe
would have been troubled if Sibyl had ever told Lamhorn she hoped he was
susceptible.

“Yes--we’re neighbors,” he said, awkwardly.

“Next-door neighbors in houses, too,” she added.

“No, not exactly. I live across the street.”

“Why, no!” she exclaimed, and seemed startled. “Your mother told me this
afternoon that you lived at home.”

“Yes, of course I live at home. I built that new house across the
street.”

“But you--” she paused, confused, and then slowly a deep color came into
her cheek. “But I understood--”

“No,” he said; “my wife and I lived with the old folks the first year,
but that’s all. Edith and Jim live with them, of course.”

“I--I see,” she said, the deep color still deepening as she turned from
him and saw, written upon a card before the gentleman at her left the
name, “Mr. James Sheridan, Jr.” And from that moment Roscoe had little
enough cause for wondering what he ought to reply to her disturbing
coquetries.

Mr. James Sheridan had been anxiously waiting for the dazzling visitor
to “get through with old Roscoe,” as he thought of it, and give a
bachelor a chance. “Old Roscoe” was the younger, but he had always been
the steady wheel-horse of the family. Jim was “steady” enough, but was
considered livelier than Roscoe, which in truth is not saying much for
Jim’s liveliness. As their father habitually boasted, both brothers were
“capable, hard-working young business men,” and the principal difference
between them was merely that which resulted from Jim’s being still a
bachelor. Physically they were of the same type: dark of eyes and of
hair, fresh-colored and thick-set, and though Roscoe was several inches
taller than Jim, neither was of the height, breadth, or depth of the
father. Both wore young business men’s mustaches, and either could have
sat for the tailor-shop lithographs of young business men wearing “rich
suitings in dark mixtures.”

Jim, approving warmly of his neighbor’s profile, perceived her access of
color, which increased his approbation. “What’s that old Roscoe saying
to you, Miss Vertrees?” he asked. “These young married men are mighty
forward nowadays, but you mustn’t let ‘em make you blush.”

“Am I blushing?” she said. “Are you sure?” And with that she gave him
ample opportunity to make sure, repeating with interest the look wasted
upon Roscoe. “I think you must be mistaken,” she continued. “I think
it’s your brother who is blushing. I’ve thrown him into confusion.”

“How?”

She laughed, and then, leaning to him a little, said in a tone as
confidential as she could make it, under cover of the uproar. “By trying
to begin with him a courtship I meant for YOU!”

This might well be a style new to Jim; and it was. He supposed it a
nonsensical form of badinage, and yet it took his breath. He realized
that he wished what she said to be the literal truth, and he was
instantly snared by that realization.

“By George!” he said. “I guess you’re the kind of girl that can say
anything--yes, and get away with it, too!”

She laughed again--in her way, so that he could not tell whether she was
laughing at him or at herself or at the nonsense she was talking; and
she said: “But you see I don’t care whether I get away with it or not.
I wish you’d tell me frankly if you think I’ve got a change to get away
with YOU?”

“More like if you’ve got a chance to get away FROM me!” Jim was inspired
to reply. “Not one in the world, especially after beginning by making
fun of me like that.”

“I mightn’t be so much in fun as you think,” she said, regarding him
with sudden gravity.

“Well,” said Jim, in simple honesty, “you’re a funny girl!”

Her gravity continued an instant longer. “I may not turn out to be funny
for YOU.”

“So long as you turn out to be anything at all for me, I expect I can
manage to be satisfied.” And with that, to his own surprise, it was his
turn to blush, whereupon she laughed again.

“Yes,” he said, plaintively, not wholly lacking intuition, “I can see
you’re the sort of girl that would laugh the minute you see a man really
means anything!”

“‘Laugh’!” she cried, gaily. “Why, it might be a matter of life and
death! But if you want tragedy, I’d better put the question at once,
considering the mistake I made with your brother.”

Jim was dazed. She seemed to be playing a little game of mockery and
nonsense with him, but he had glimpses of a flashing danger in it;
he was but too sensible of being outclassed, and had somewhere a
consciousness that he could never quite know this giddy and alluring
lady, no matter how long it pleased her to play with him. But he
mightily wanted her to keep on playing with him.

“Put what question?” he said, breathlessly.

“As you are a new neighbor of mine and of my family,” she returned,
speaking slowly and with a cross-examiner’s severity, “I think it would
be well for me to know at once whether you are already walking out with
any young lady or not. Mr. Sheridan, think well! Are you spoken for?”

“Not yet,” he gasped. “Are you?”

“NO!” she cried, and with that they both laughed again; and the pastime
proceeded, increasing both in its gaiety and in its gravity.

Observing its continuance, Mr. Robert Lamhorn, opposite, turned from a
lively conversation with Edith and remarked covertly to Sibyl that Miss
Vertrees was “starting rather picturesquely with Jim.” And he added,
languidly, “Do you suppose she WOULD?”

For the moment Sibyl gave no sign of having heard him, but seemed
interested in the clasp of a long “rope” of pearls, a loop of which she
was allowing to swing from her fingers, resting her elbow upon the table
and following with her eyes the twinkle of diamonds and platinum in the
clasp at the end of the loop. She wore many jewels. She was pretty,
but hers was not the kind of prettiness to be loaded with too sumptuous
accessories, and jeweled head-dresses are dangerous--they may emphasize
the wrongness of the wearer.

“I said Miss Vertrees seems to be starting pretty strong with Jim,”
 repeated Mr. Lamhorn.

“I heard you.” There was a latent discontent always somewhere in her
eyes, no matter what she threw upon the surface of cover it, and just
now she did not care to cover it; she looked sullen. “Starting any
stronger than you did with Edith?” she inquired.

“Oh, keep the peace!” he said, crossly. “That’s off, of course.”

“You haven’t been making her see it this evening--precisely,” said
Sibyl, looking at him steadily. “You’ve talked to her for--”

“For Heaven’s sake,” he begged, “keep the peace!”

“Well, what have you just been doing?”

“SH!” he said. “Listen to your father-in-law.”

Sheridan was booming and braying louder than ever, the orchestra having
begun to play “The Rosary,” to his vast content.

“I COUNT THEM OVER, LA-LA-TUM-TEE-DUM,” he roared, beating the measures
with his fork. “EACH HOUR A PEARL, EACH PEARL TEE-DUM-TUM-DUM--What’s
the matter with all you folks? Why’n’t you SING? Miss Vertrees, I bet a
thousand dollars YOU sing! Why’n’t--”

“Mr. Sheridan,” she said, turning cheerfully from the ardent Jim, “you
don’t know what you interrupted! Your son isn’t used to my rough ways,
and my soldier’s wooing frightens him, but I think he was about to say
something important.”

“I’ll say something important to him if he doesn’t!” the father
threatened, more delighted with her than ever. “By gosh! if I was his
age--or a widower right NOW--”

“Oh, wait!” cried Mary. “If they’d only make less noise! I want Mrs.
Sheridan to hear.”

“She’d say the same,” he shouted. “She’d tell me I was mighty slow if I
couldn’t get ahead o’ Jim. Why, when I was his age--”

“You must listen to your father,” Mary interrupted, turning to Jim, who
had grown red again. “He’s going to tell us how, when he was your age,
he made those two blades of grass grow out of a teacup--and you could
see for yourself he didn’t get them out of his sleeve!”

At that Sheridan pounded the table till it jumped. “Look here, young
lady!” he roared. “Some o’ these days I’m either goin’ to slap you--or
I’m goin’ to kiss you!”

Edith looked aghast; she was afraid this was indeed “too awful,” but
Mary Vertrees burst into ringing laughter.

“Both!” she cried. “Both! The one to make me forget the other!”

“But which--” he began, and then suddenly gave forth such stentorian
trumpetings of mirth that for once the whole table stopped to listen.
“Jim,” he roared, “if you don’t propose to that girl to-night I’ll send
you back to the machine-shop with Bibbs!”

And Bibbs--down among the retainers by the sugar Pump Works, and
watching Mary Vertrees as a ragged boy in the street might watch a rich
little girl in a garden--Bibbs heard. He heard--and he knew what his
father’s plans were now.



CHAPTER VII

Mrs. Vertrees “sat up” for her daughter, Mr. Vertrees having retired
after a restless evening, not much soothed by the society of his
Landseers. Mary had taken a key, insisting that he should not come for
her and seeming confident that she would not lack for escort; nor did
the sequel prove her confidence unwarranted. But Mrs. Vertrees had a
long vigil of it.

She was not the woman to make herself easy--no servant had ever seen her
in a wrapper--and with her hair and dress and her shoes just what they
had been when she returned from the afternoon’s call, she sat through
the slow night hours in a stiff little chair under the gaslight in her
own room, which was directly over the “front hall.” There, book in hand,
she employed the time in her own reminiscences, though it was her belief
that she was reading Madame de Remusat’s.

Her thoughts went backward into her life and into her husband’s; and the
deeper into the past they went, the brighter the pictures they brought
her--and there is tragedy. Like her husband, she thought backward
because she did not dare think forward definitely. What thinking forward
this troubled couple ventured took the form of a slender hope which
neither of them could have borne to hear put in words, and yet they
had talked it over, day after day, from the very hour when they heard
Sheridan was to build his New House next door. For--so quickly does
any ideal of human behavior become an antique--their youth was of the
innocent old days, so dead! of “breeding” and “gentility,” and no craft
had been more straitly trained upon them than that of talking about
things without mentioning them. Herein was marked the most vital
difference between Mr. and Mrs. Vertrees and their big new neighbor.
Sheridan, though his youth was of the same epoch, knew nothing of such
matters. He had been chopping wood for the morning fire in the country
grocery while they were still dancing.

It was after one o’clock when Mrs. Vertrees heard steps and the delicate
clinking of the key in the lock, and then, with the opening of the door,
Mary’s laugh, and “Yes--if you aren’t afraid--to-morrow!”

The door closed, and she rushed up-stairs, bringing with her a breath
of cold and bracing air into her mother’s room. “Yes,” she said, before
Mrs. Vertrees could speak, “he brought me home!”

She let her cloak fall upon the bed, and, drawing an old red-velvet
rocking-chair forward, sat beside her mother after giving her a light
pat upon the shoulder and a hearty kiss upon the cheek.

“Mamma!” Mary exclaimed, when Mrs. Vertrees had expressed a hope that
she had enjoyed the evening and had not caught cold. “Why don’t you ask
me?”

This inquiry obviously made her mother uncomfortable. “I don’t--” she
faltered. “Ask you what, Mary?”

“How I got along and what he’s like.”

“Mary!”

“Oh, it isn’t distressing!” said Mary. “And I got along so fast--” She
broke off to laugh; continuing then, “But that’s the way I went at it,
of course. We ARE in a hurry, aren’t we?”

“I don’t know what you mean,” Mrs. Vertrees insisted, shaking her head
plaintively.

“Yes,” said Mary, “I’m going out in his car with him to-morrow
afternoon, and to the theater the next night--but I stopped it there.
You see, after you give the first push, you must leave it to them while
YOU pretend to run away!”

“My dear, I don’t know what to--”

“What to make of anything!” Mary finished for her. “So that’s all
right! Now I’ll tell you all about it. It was gorgeous and deafening and
tee-total. We could have lived a year on it. I’m not good at figures,
but I calculated that if we lived six months on poor old Charlie and Ned
and the station-wagon and the Victoria, we could manage at least twice
as long on the cost of the ‘house-warming.’ I think the orchids alone
would have lasted us a couple of months. There they were, before me, but
I couldn’t steal ‘em and sell ‘em, and so--well, so I did what I could!”

She leaned back and laughed reassuringly to her troubled mother. “It
seemed to be a success--what I could,” she said, clasping her hands
behind her neck and stirring the rocker to motion as a rhythmic
accompaniment to her narrative. “The girl Edith and her sister-in-law,
Mrs. Roscoe Sheridan, were too anxious about the effect of things on me.
The father’s worth a bushel of both of them, if they knew it. He’s
what he is. I like him.” She paused reflectively, continuing, “Edith’s
‘interested’ in that Lamhorn boy; he’s good-looking and not stupid, but
I think he’s--” She interrupted herself with a cheery outcry: “Oh! I
mustn’t be calling him names! If he’s trying to make Edith like him, I
ought to respect him as a colleague.”

“I don’t understand a thing you’re talking about,” Mrs. Vertrees
complained.

“All the better! Well, he’s a bad lot, that Lamhorn boy; everybody’s
always known that, but the Sheridans don’t know the everybodies that
know. He sat between Edith and Mrs. Roscoe Sheridan. SHE’S like those
people you wondered about at the theater, the last time we went--dressed
in ball-gowns; bound to show their clothes and jewels SOMEwhere! She
flatters the father, and so did I, for that matter--but not that way. I
treated him outrageously!”

“Mary!”

“That’s what flattered him. After dinner he made the whole regiment of
us follow him all over the house, while he lectured like a guide on the
Palatine. He gave dimensions and costs, and the whole b’ilin’ of ‘em
listened as if they thought he intended to make them a present of the
house. What he was proudest of was the plumbing and that Bay of Naples
panorama in the hall. He made us look at all the plumbing--bath-rooms
and everywhere else--and then he made us look at the Bay of Naples. He
said it was a hundred and eleven feet long, but I think it’s more. And
he led us all into the ready-made library to see a poem Edith had taken
a prize with at school. They’d had it printed in gold letters and framed
in mother-of-pearl. But the poem itself was rather simple and wistful
and nice--he read it to us, though Edith tried to stop him. She was
modest about it, and said she’d never written anything else. And then,
after a while, Mrs. Roscoe Sheridan asked me to come across the street
to her house with them--her husband and Edith and Mr. Lamhorn and Jim
Sheridan--”

Mrs. Vertrees was shocked. “‘Jim’!” she exclaimed. “Mary, PLEASE--”

“Of course,” said Mary. “I’ll make it as easy for you as I can,
mamma. Mr. James Sheridan, Junior. We went over there, and Mrs. Roscoe
explained that ‘the men were all dying for a drink,’ though I noticed
that Mr. Lamhorn was the only one near death’s door on that account.
Edith and Mrs. Roscoe said they knew I’d been bored at the dinner. They
were objectionably apologetic about it, and they seemed to think NOW we
were going to have a ‘good time’ to make up for it. But I hadn’t been
bored at the dinner, I’d been amused; and the ‘good time’ at Mrs.
Roscoe’s was horribly, horribly stupid.”

“But, Mary,” her mother began, “is--is--” And she seemed unable to
complete the question.

“Never mind, mamma. I’ll say it. Is Mr. James Sheridan, Junior, stupid?
I’m sure he’s not at all stupid about business. Otherwise--Oh, what
right have I to be calling people ‘stupid’ because they’re not exactly
my kind? On the big dinner-table they had enormous icing models of the
Sheridan Building--”

“Oh, no!” Mrs. Vertrees cried. “Surely not!”

“Yes, and two other things of that kind--I don’t know what. But, after
all, I wondered if they were so bad. If I’d been at a dinner at a palace
in Italy, and a relief or inscription on one of the old silver pieces
had referred to some great deed or achievement of the family, I
shouldn’t have felt superior; I’d have thought it picturesque and
stately--I’d have been impressed. And what’s the real difference? The
icing is temporary, and that’s much more modest, isn’t it? And why is
it vulgar to feel important more on account of something you’ve done
yourself than because of something one of your ancestors did? Besides,
if we go back a few generations, we’ve all got such hundreds of
ancestors it seems idiotic to go picking out one or two to be proud of
ourselves about. Well, then, mamma, I managed not to feel superior to
Mr. James Sheridan, Junior, because he didn’t see anything out of place
in the Sheridan Building in sugar.”

Mrs. Vertrees’s expression had lost none of its anxiety pending the
conclusion of this lively bit of analysis, and she shook her head
gravely. “My dear, dear child,” she said, “it seems to me--It looks--I’m
afraid--”

“Say as much of it as you can, mamma,” said Mary, encouragingly. “I can
get it, if you’ll just give me one key-word.”

“Everything you say,” Mrs. Vertrees began, timidly, “seems to have the
air of--it is as if you were seeking to--to make yourself--”

“Oh, I see! You mean I sound as if I were trying to force myself to like
him.”

“Not exactly, Mary. That wasn’t quite what I meant,” said Mrs. Vertrees,
speaking direct untruth with perfect unconsciousness. “But you said
that--that you found the latter part of the evening at young Mrs.
Sheridan’s unentertaining--”

“And as Mr. James Sheridan was there, and I saw more of him than at
dinner, and had a horribly stupid time in spite of that, you think I--”
 And then it was Mary who left the deduction unfinished.

Mrs. Vertrees nodded; and though both the mother and the daughter
understood, Mary felt it better to make the understanding definite.

“Well,” she asked, gravely, “is there anything else I can do? You and
papa don’t want me to do anything that distresses me, and so, as this is
the only thing to be done, it seems it’s up to me not to let it distress
me. That’s all there is about it, isn’t it?”

“But nothing MUST distress you!” the mother cried.

“That’s what I say!” said Mary, cheerfully. “And so it doesn’t. It’s all
right.” She rose and took her cloak over her arm, as if to go to her own
room. But on the way to the door she stopped, and stood leaning against
the foot of the bed, contemplating a threadbare rug at her feet.
“Mother, you’ve told me a thousand times that it doesn’t really matter
whom a girl marries.”

“No, no!” Mrs. Vertrees protested. “I never said such a--”

“No, not in words; I mean what you MEANT. It’s true, isn’t it, that
marriage really is ‘not a bed of roses, but a field of battle’? To get
right down to it, a girl could fight it out with anybody, couldn’t she?
One man as well as another?”

“Oh, my dear! I’m sure your father and I--”

“Yes, yes,” said Mary, indulgently. “I don’t mean you and papa. But
isn’t it propinquity that makes marriages? So many people say so, there
must be something in it.”

“Mary, I can’t bear for you to talk like that.” And Mrs. Vertrees
lifted pleading eyes to her daughter--eyes that begged to be spared. “It
sounds--almost reckless!”

Mary caught the appeal, came to her, and kissed her gaily. “Never fret,
dear! I’m not likely to do anything I don’t want to do--I’ve always been
too thorough-going a little pig! And if it IS propinquity that does our
choosing for us, well, at least no girl in the world could ask for more
than THAT! How could there be any more propinquity than the very house
next door?”

She gave her mother a final kiss and went gaily all the way to the door
this time, pausing for her postscript with her hand on the knob. “Oh,
the one that caught me looking in the window, mamma, the youngest one--”

“Did he speak of it?” Mrs. Vertrees asked, apprehensively.

“No. He didn’t speak at all, that I saw, to any one. I didn’t meet him.
But he isn’t insane, I’m sure; or if he is, he has long intervals when
he’s not. Mr. James Sheridan mentioned that he lived at home when he was
‘well enough’; and it may be he’s only an invalid. He looks dreadfully
ill, but he has pleasant eyes, and it struck me that if--if one were
in the Sheridan family”--she laughed a little ruefully--“he might be
interesting to talk to sometimes, when there was too much stocks and
bonds. I didn’t see him after dinner.”

“There must be something wrong with him,” said Mrs. Vertrees. “They’d
have introduced him if there wasn’t.”

“I don’t know. He’s been ill so much and away so much--sometimes people
like that just don’t seem to ‘count’ in a family. His father spoke of
sending him back to a machine-shop or some sort; I suppose he meant
when the poor thing gets better. I glanced at him just then, when Mr.
Sheridan mentioned him, and he happened to be looking straight at me;
and he was pathetic-looking enough before that, but the most tragic
change came over him. He seemed just to die, right there at the table!”

“You mean when his father spoke of sending him to the shop place?”

“Yes.”

“Mr. Sheridan must be very unfeeling.”

“No,” said Mary, thoughtfully, “I don’t think he is; but he might be
uncomprehending, and certainly he’s the kind of man to do anything he
once sets out to do. But I wish I hadn’t been looking at that poor boy
just then! I’m afraid I’ll keep remembering--”

“I wouldn’t.” Mrs. Vertrees smiled faintly, and in her smile there
was the remotest ghost of a genteel roguishness. “I’d keep my mind on
pleasanter things, Mary.”

Mary laughed and nodded. “Yes, indeed! Plenty pleasant enough, and
probably, if all were known, too good--even for me!”

And when she had gone Mrs. Vertrees drew a long breath, as if a burden
were off her mind, and, smiling, began to undress in a gentle reverie.



CHAPTER VIII

Edith, glancing casually into the “ready-made” library, stopped
abruptly, seeing Bibbs there alone. He was standing before the
pearl-framed and golden-lettered poem, musingly inspecting it. He read
it:

                  FUGITIVE

  I will forget the things that sting:
    The lashing look, the barbed word.
  I know the very hands that fling
    The stones at me had never stirred
  To anger but for their own scars.
    They’ve suffered so, that’s why they strike.
  I’ll keep my heart among the stars
    Where none shall hunt it out.  Oh, like
  These wounded ones I must not be,
    For, wounded, I might strike in turn!
  So, none shall hurt me.  Far and free
    Where my heart flies no one shall learn.

“Bibbs!” Edith’s voice was angry, and her color deepened suddenly as she
came into the room, preceded by a scent of violets much more powerful
than that warranted by the actual bunch of them upon the lapel of her
coat.

Bibbs did not turn his head, but wagged it solemnly, seeming depressed
by the poem. “Pretty young, isn’t it?” he said. “There must have been
something about your looks that got the prize, Edith; I can’t believe
the poem did it.”

She glanced hurriedly over her shoulder and spoke sharply, but in a
low voice: “I don’t think it’s very nice of you to bring it up at all,
Bibbs. I’d like a chance to forget the whole silly business. I didn’t
want them to frame it, and I wish to goodness papa’d quit talking about
it; but here, that night, after the dinner, didn’t he go and read it
aloud to the whole crowd of ‘em! And then they all wanted to know what
other poems I’d written and why I didn’t keep it up and write some more,
and if I didn’t, why didn’t I, and why this and why that, till I thought
I’d die of shame!”

“You could tell ‘em you had writer’s cramp,” Bibbs suggested.

“I couldn’t tell ‘em anything! I just choke with mortification every
time anybody speaks of the thing.”

Bibbs looked grieved. “The poem isn’t THAT bad, Edith. You see, you were
only seventeen when you wrote it.”

“Oh, hush up!” she snapped. “I wish it had burnt my fingers the first
time I touched it. Then I might have had sense enough to leave it where
it was. I had no business to take it, and I’ve been ashamed--”

“No, no,” he said, comfortingly. “It was the very most flattering thing
ever happen to me. It was almost my last flight before I went to the
machine-shop, and it’s pleasant to think somebody liked it enough to--”

“But I DON’T like it!” she exclaimed. “I don’t even understand it--and
papa made so much fuss over its getting the prize, I just hate it! The
truth is I never dreamed it’d get the prize.”

“Maybe they expected father to endow the school,” Bibbs murmured.

“Well, I had to have something to turn in, and I couldn’t write a LINE!
I hate poetry, anyhow; and Bobby Lamhorn’s always teasing me about how
I ‘keep my heart among the stars.’ He makes it seem such a mushy kind of
thing, the way he says it. I hate it!”

“You’ll have to live it down, Edith. Perhaps abroad and under another
name you might find--”

“Oh, hush up! I’ll hire some one to steal it and burn it the first
chance I get.” She turned away petulantly, moving to the door. “I’d like
to think I could hope to hear the last of it before I die!”

“Edith!” he called, as she went into the hall.

“What’s the matter?”

“I want to ask you: Do I really look better, or have you just got used
to me?”

“What on earth do you mean?” she said, coming back as far as the
threshold.

“When I first came you couldn’t look at me,” Bibbs explained, in his
impersonal way. “But I’ve noticed you look at me lately. I wondered if
I’d--”

“It’s because you look so much better,” she told him, cheerfully. “This
month you’ve been here’s done you no end of good. It’s the change.”

“Yes, that’s what they said at the sanitarium--the change.”

“You look worse than ‘most anybody I ever saw,” said Edith, with supreme
candor. “But I don’t know much about it. I’ve never seen a corpse in my
life, and I’ve never even seen anybody that was terribly sick, so you
mustn’t judge by me. I only know you do look better, I’m glad to say.
But you’re right about my not being able to look at you at first. You
had a kind of whiteness that--Well, you’re almost as thin, I suppose,
but you’ve got more just ordinarily pale; not that ghastly look. Anybody
could look at you now, Bibbs, and no--not get--”

“Sick?”

“Well--almost that!” she laughed. “And you’re getting a better color
every day, Bibbs; you really are. You’re getting along splendidly.”

“I--I’m afraid so,” he said, ruefully.

“‘Afraid so’! Well, if you aren’t the queerest! I suppose you mean
father might send you back to the machine-shop if you get well enough.
I heard him say something about it the night of the--” The jingle of
a distant bell interrupted her, and she glanced at her watch. “Bobby
Lamhorn! I’m going to motor him out to look at a place in the country.
Afternoon, Bibbs!”

When she had gone, Bibbs mooned pessimistically from shelf to shelf,
his eye wandering among the titles of the books. The library consisted
almost entirely of handsome “uniform editions”: Irving, Poe, Cooper,
Goldsmith, Scott, Byron, Burns, Longfellow, Tennyson, Hume, Gibbon,
Prescott, Thackeray, Dickens, De Musset, Balzac, Gautier, Flaubert,
Goethe, Schiller, Dante, and Tasso. There were shelves and shelves
of encyclopedias, of anthologies, of “famous classics,” of “Oriental
masterpieces,” of “masterpieces of oratory,” and more shelves of
“selected libraries” of “literature,” of “the drama,” and of “modern
science.” They made an effective decoration for the room, all these
big, expensive books, with a glossy binding here and there twinkling a
reflection of the flames that crackled in the splendid Gothic fireplace;
but Bibbs had an impression that the bookseller who selected them
considered them a relief, and that white-jacket considered them a
burden of dust, and that nobody else considered them at all. Himself, he
disturbed not one.

There came a chime of bells from a clock in another part of the house,
and white-jacket appeared beamingly in the doorway, bearing furs.
“Awready, Mist’ Bibbs,” he announced. “You’ ma say wrap up wawm f’ you’
ride, an’ she cain’ go with you to-day, an’ not f’git go see you’ pa at
fo’ ‘clock. Aw ready, suh.”

He equipped Bibbs for the daily drive Dr. Gurney had commanded; and in
the manner of a master of ceremonies unctuously led the way. In the
hall they passed the Moor, and Bibbs paused before it while white-jacket
opened the door with a flourish and waved condescendingly to the
chauffeur in the car which stood waiting in the driveway.

“It seems to me I asked you what you thought about this ‘statue’ when I
first came home, George,” said Bibbs, thoughtfully. “What did you tell
me?”

“Yessuh!” George chuckled, perfectly understanding that for some unknown
reason Bibbs enjoyed hearing him repeat his opinion of the Moor. “You
ast me when you firs’ come home, an’ you ast me nex’ day, an’ mighty
near ev’y day all time you been here; an’ las’ Sunday you ast me
twicet.” He shook his head solemnly. “Look to me mus’ be somep’m might
lamiDAL ‘bout ‘at statue!”

“Mighty what?”

“Mighty lamiDAL!” George, burst out laughing. “What DO ‘at word mean,
Mist’ Bibbs?”

“It’s new to me, George. Where did you hear it?”

“I nev’ DID hear it!” said George. “I uz dess sittin’ thinkum to myse’f
an’ she pop in my head--‘lamiDAL,’ dess like ‘at! An’ she soun’ so good,
seem like she GOTTA mean somep’m!”

“Come to think of it, I believe she does mean something. Why, yes--”

“Do she?” cried George. “WHAT she mean?”

“It’s exactly the word for the statue,” said Bibbs, with conviction, as
he climbed into the car. “It’s a lamiDAL statue.”

“Hiyi!” George exulted. “Man! Man! Listen! Well, suh, she mighty lamiDAL
statue, but lamiDAL statue heap o’ trouble to dus’!” “I expect she is!”
 said Bibbs, as the engine began to churn; and a moment later he was
swept from sight.

George turned to Mist’ Jackson, who had been listening benevolently in
the hallway. “Same he aw-ways say, Mist’ Jackson--‘I expec’ she is!’
Ev’y day he try t’ git me talk ‘bout ‘at lamiDAL statue, an’ aw-ways,
las’ thing HE say, ‘I expec’ she is!’ You know, Mist’ Jackson, if he git
well, ‘at young man go’ be pride o’ the family, Mist’ Jackson. Yes-suh,
right now I pick ‘im fo’ firs’ money!”

“Look out with all ‘at money, George!” Jackson warned the enthusiast.
“White folks ‘n ‘is house know ‘im heap longer’n you. You the on’y man
bettin’ on ‘im!”

“I risk it!” cried George, merrily. “I put her all on now--ev’y cent!
‘At boy’s go’ be flower o’ the flock!”

This singular prophecy, founded somewhat recklessly upon gratitude for
the meaning of “lamiDAL,” differed radically from another prediction
concerning Bibbs, set forth for the benefit of a fair auditor some
twenty minutes later.

Jim Sheridan, skirting the edges of the town with Mary Vertrees
beside him, in his own swift machine, encountered the invalid upon
the highroad. The two cars were going in opposite directions, and the
occupants of Jim’s had only a swaying glimpse of Bibbs sitting alone on
the back seat--his white face startlingly white against cap and collar
of black fur--but he flashed into recognition as Mary bowed to him.

Jim waved his left hand carelessly. “It’s Bibbs, taking his
constitutional,” he explained.

“Yes, I know,” said Mary. “I bowed to him, too, though I’ve never met
him. In fact, I’ve only seen him once--no, twice. I hope he won’t think
I’m very bold, bowing to him.”

“I doubt if he noticed it,” said honest Jim.

“Oh, no!” she cried.

“What’s the trouble?”

“I’m almost sure people notice it when I bow to them.”

“Oh, I see!” said Jim. “Of course they would ordinarily, but Bibbs is
funny.”

“Is he? How?” she asked. “He strikes me as anything but funny.”

“Well, I’m his brother,” Jim said, deprecatingly, “but I don’t know what
he’s like, and, to tell the truth, I’ve never felt exactly like I WAS
his brother, the way I do Roscoe. Bibbs never did seem more than half
alive to me. Of course Roscoe and I are older, and when we were boys we
were too big to play with him, but he never played anyway, with boys his
own age. He’d rather just sit in the house and mope around by himself.
Nobody could ever get him to DO anything; you can’t get him to do
anything now. He never had any LIFE in him; and honestly, if he is my
brother, I must say I believe Bibbs Sheridan is the laziest man God ever
made! Father put him in the machine-shop over at the Pump Works--best
thing in the world for him--and he was just plain no account. It made
him sick! If he’d had the right kind of energy--the kind father’s got,
for instance, or Roscoe, either--why, it wouldn’t have made him sick.
And suppose it was either of them--yes, or me, either--do you think any
of us would have stopped if we WERE sick? Not much! I hate to say it,
but Bibbs Sheridan’ll never amount to anything as long as he lives.”

Mary looked thoughtful. “Is there any particular reason why he should?”
 she asked.

“Good gracious!” he exclaimed. “You don’t mean that, do you? Don’t you
believe in a man’s knowing how to earn his salt, no matter how much
money his father’s got? Hasn’t the business of this world got to be
carried on by everybody in it? Are we going to lay back on what we’ve
got and see other fellows get ahead of us? If we’ve got big things
already, isn’t it every man’s business to go ahead and make ‘em bigger?
Isn’t it his duty? Don’t we always want to get bigger and bigger?”

“Ye-es--I don’t know. But I feel rather sorry for your brother. He
looked so lonely--and sick.”

“He’s gettin